CISQ-maturity/index.md, before:

# Maturity levels in the CISQ security model

## Introducing the model

The Composing Information Security Qualities (CISQ) model is created by combining insights and definitions from the [CIA triad](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_security#CIA_triad), [Parkerian Hexad](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parkerian_Hexad), and [STRIDE threat model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/STRIDE_model). The result is a model of four-pillar security qualities and eleven composed security qualities. Each security quality has a corresponding threat category inspired by the STRIDE threat model. You can read more about the model here: [CISQ-Model of security qualities](https://acje.github.io/CISQ-model)

The CISQ security model can be a bit daunting at first. To make the model more approachable, this document presents a step-by-step maturity model, starting with the four pillars and then building on them in a systematic manner.

## How to use the model

The CISQ model structures the vocabulary of security qualities. These are qualities we want to protect when working with information systems. When performing a risk assessment, as mandated in ISO/IEC 27005, the CISQ model may help when establishing the context and identifying risks. If you use threat modeling to identify risk, then CISQ can replace or enhance the STRIDE model in this situation.

## Maturity level one

At the first level, the four-pillar qualities are evaluated in the context of the system. These qualities will be important to evaluate for any system, and they form the foundation for all the other security concepts at any maturity level.

| ![CISQ security model version 1.0](CISQ-maturity-l1.png) |
|                      :--:                                |
|  *Maturity level one of the CISQ security model*         |

The four pillar security qualities are:

**Availability** - Timely access to information and behavior

*Corresponding threat category*: Denial of service

*Typical security controls*: Redundancy, capacity planning, rate limiting, traffic scrubbing and shaping (ACLs, WAFs), load balancing

**Integrity** - Preserving correctness and completeness of information and behavior

*Corresponding threat category*: Tampering

*Typical security controls*: Input validation, hash functions, session management, separation of duties

**Control** - Power to physically or logically influence information and behavior

*Corresponding threat category*: Elevation of privilege

*Typical security controls*: Principle of least privilege, patch management, logging and auditing

**Authenticity** - Information and behavior originate from their purported source

*Corresponding threat category*: Spoofing

*Typical security controls*: Multi-factor authentication (MFA), signatures, certificates

## Maturity level two

At maturity level two, we introduce some common higher-order qualities that are composed of two or three pillar qualities from maturity level one.

| ![CISQ security model version 1.0](CISQ-maturity-l2.png) |
|                      :--:                                |
|  *Maturity level two of the CISQ security model*         |

**Utility** - Usefulness of information and behavior

*Corresponding threat category*: Information contortion

*Typical security controls*: API management, type checks

**Confidentiality** - Access to information and behavior is exclusively limited to authorized entities

*Corresponding threat category*: Information disclosure

*Typical security controls*: Encryption, access control lists (ACLs), data loss prevention (DLP), data classification policies

**Non-repudiation** - (Accountability) Assurance of the correctness, completeness and origin of information and behavior

*Corresponding threat category*: Repudiation

*Typical security controls*: Signatures, public key infrastructure (PKI), audit trails and logs, message authentication codes (MACs), digital contracts, hashing, trusted third parties

## Maturity level three

At maturity level three, we introduce more accurate definitions of concepts. Increasing your depth of conceptual understanding may help develop and categorize security controls (not to be confused with the *control quality* in the CISQ model).

| ![CISQ security model version 1.0](CISQ-maturity-l3.png) |
|                      :--:                                |
|  *Maturity level two of the CISQ security model*         |

**Reliability** – Trustworthy information and behavior

**Sustainability** – Ability to maintain information and behavior

**Authority** – Power to grant access to information and behavior

**Durability** – Ability to withstand degradation of integrity of information and behavior

**Credibility** – Ability to verify information and behavior

**Certifiability** – Ability to prove validity of information and behavior

**Assurance** – (Assurability) Ability to positively confirm information and behavior

**Traceability** – Ability to discover where and how information and behavior were produced

Commit message:

add simplified overview. Utility replaced by sustainability

CISQ-maturity/index.md, after:

# Maturity levels in the CISQ security model

| ![CISQ security model version 1.0](CISQ-L2-Overview.png)           |
|                      :--:                                          |
|  *CISQ security model v1.0, Maturity level 2, simplified overview* |

## Introducing the model

The Composing Information Security Qualities (CISQ) model is created by combining insights and definitions from the [CIA triad](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_security#CIA_triad), [Parkerian Hexad](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parkerian_Hexad), and [STRIDE threat model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/STRIDE_model). The result is a model of four-pillar security qualities and eleven composed security qualities. Each security quality has a corresponding threat category inspired by the STRIDE threat model. You can read more about the model here: [CISQ-Model of security qualities](https://acje.github.io/CISQ-model)

The CISQ security model can be a bit daunting at first. To make the model more approachable, this document presents a step-by-step maturity model, starting with the four pillars and then building on them in a systematic manner.

## How to use the model

The CISQ model structures the vocabulary of security qualities. These are qualities we want to protect when working with information systems. When performing a risk assessment, as mandated in ISO/IEC 27005, the CISQ model may help when establishing the context and identifying risks. If you use threat modeling to identify risk, then CISQ can replace or enhance the STRIDE model in this situation.

## Maturity level one

At the first level, the four-pillar qualities are evaluated in the context of the system. These qualities will be important to evaluate for any system, and they form the foundation for all the other security concepts at any maturity level.

| ![CISQ security model version 1.0](CISQ-maturity-l1.png) |
|                      :--:                                |
|  *Maturity level one of the CISQ security model*         |

The four pillar security qualities are:

**Availability** - Timely access to information and behavior

*Corresponding threat category*: Denial of service

*Typical security controls*: Redundancy, capacity planning, rate limiting, traffic scrubbing and shaping (ACLs, WAFs), load balancing

**Integrity** - Preserving correctness and completeness of information and behavior

*Corresponding threat category*: Tampering

*Typical security controls*: Input validation, hash functions, session management, separation of duties

**Control** - Power to physically or logically influence information and behavior

*Corresponding threat category*: Elevation of privilege

*Typical security controls*: Principle of least privilege, patch management, logging and auditing

**Authenticity** - Information and behavior originate from their purported source

*Corresponding threat category*: Spoofing

*Typical security controls*: Multi-factor authentication (MFA), signatures, certificates

## Maturity level two

At maturity level two, we introduce some common higher-order qualities that are composed of two or three pillar qualities from maturity level one.

| ![CISQ security model version 1.0](CISQ-maturity-l2.png) |
|                      :--:                                |
|  *Maturity level two of the CISQ security model*         |

Maturity level 2 can be represented in the simplified view.

| ![CISQ security model version 1.0](CISQ-transformation.png)                                       |
|                      :--:                                                                         |
|  *CISQ security model has a base view implementing all maturity levels and a simplified overview* |

Together with related perspectives this is a usefull representation and startingpoint for most teams managing information systems. The higher maturity levels are meant for security professionals and infrastructure or platform teams focusing on deeper understanding of their security posture.

| ![CISQ security model version 1.0](CISQ-L2-Overview.png)           |
|                      :--:                                          |
|  *CISQ security model v1.0, Maturity level 2, simplified overview* |

**Utility** - Usefulness of information and behavior

*Corresponding threat category*: Information contortion

*Typical security controls*: API management, type checks

**Confidentiality** - Access to information and behavior is exclusively limited to authorized entities

*Corresponding threat category*: Information disclosure

*Typical security controls*: Encryption, access control lists (ACLs), data loss prevention (DLP), data classification policies

**Non-repudiation** - (Accountability) Assurance of the correctness, completeness and origin of information and behavior

*Corresponding threat category*: Repudiation

*Typical security controls*: Signatures, public key infrastructure (PKI), audit trails and logs, message authentication codes (MACs), digital contracts, hashing, trusted third parties

## Maturity level three

At maturity level three, we introduce more accurate definitions of concepts. Increasing your depth of conceptual understanding may help develop and categorize security controls (not to be confused with the *control quality* in the CISQ model).

| ![CISQ security model version 1.0](CISQ-maturity-l3.png) |
|                      :--:                                |
|  *Maturity level two of the CISQ security model*         |

**Reliability** – Trustworthy information and behavior

**Sustainability** – Ability to maintain information and behavior

**Authority** – Power to grant access to information and behavior

**Durability** – Ability to withstand degradation of integrity of information and behavior

**Credibility** – Ability to verify information and behavior

**Certifiability** – Ability to prove validity of information and behavior

**Assurance** – (Assurability) Ability to positively confirm information and behavior

**Traceability** – Ability to discover where and how information and behavior were produced
