scaled_agile/post.md, before:

# Scaling agile - Lessons observed

These are my notes on how an organisation transformed quickly from hardly being able to run a handfull of digitalization projects in parallell and only creating vale from them sporadically, into a fast moving agile organizsation. I have observed this type of transition twise in the role of architect in two different organisations both with tens of projects or teams running in parallel. First time the target was SAFe, not much to see there, but I might reference it where it matters, this second time it is a much more deliberate and tailored approach.

TLDR; Obtaining massive improvements in speed, domain knowledge and short term value creation was very doable. Just follow "Accellerate" and implement stream aligned teams and plattform teams form "Team topologies" and make sure your teams gets a "mission" described while protecting them form strong internal forces that will want to place orders for change in their systems. The lessons here are more subtle and twofold;
- First lesson - Speed is not a substitute for direction
- Second lesson - Creating value creates second order effects in the shape of risk and opportunities hiding or missing in the  structure of your implementations.

Commit message:

clean up text and create plan

scaled_agile/post.md, after:

# Scaling Agile - Lessons Observed

These are my notes on how an organisation transformed quickly from hardly being able to run a handfull of digitalization projects in parallell and only creating vale from them sporadically, into a fast moving agile organizsation. I have observed this type of transition twise in the role of architect in two different organisations both with tens of projects or teams running in parallel. First time the target was SAFe, not much to see there, but I might reference it where it matters, this second time it is a much more deliberate and tailored approach.

TLDR; Obtaining massive improvements in speed, domain knowledge and short term value creation was very doable. Just follow "Accellerate" and implement stream aligned teams and plattform teams form "Team topologies". Then make sure your teams gets a clear "mission" described while protecting them form strong internal forces that will want to place orders for change in their systems. The lessons here are however more subtle and twofold;
- First lesson - Speed is actually a substitute for direction, but it doesn´t scale
- Second lesson - Managing success. Creating value creates second order effects in the shape of risk and opportunities hiding or missing in the  structure of your implementations.

[Work in progress]
For the rest of this post I will proceed to explain:
- What we actually did to create a productive digitalization org.
- Lesson one - Speed
-- Bees and discovery: serendipity
-- 
- Lesson two - Manage success
-- Kent Beck — behavior and structure
-- Risks
-- Opportunities
- Places to innovate
-- The Art of Action — directed opportunism
-- Alignment and autonomy
- Costs of transition
-- Organizational costs
-- Personal costs
